Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Labs, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Robert Kruger. He is
distinguished McKnight University professor in the Department of Psychology
at the University of Minnesota. And today, we're going
to talk about the classification of disorders in psychiatry,
the hierarchical taxonomy of psychopathology, personality, uh, subjective well-being,
and other related topics. So, Doctor Kruger, welcome to
the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Yeah, thanks again for inviting me.
So, let's start by talking a little bit about
nosology, psychiatric nosology or how the classification of mental
disorders is done in psychiatry. So, what do you
think of the way psychiatric nosology works today?
Um, SO I suppose we could start with the
sort of um official noseologies, I guess that's where
you're headed with this question. So, you know, descriptive
psychiatry has a rich history, um, and has functioned
historically in a way that's similar to how medicine
is functioned, which is to say that clinical observation
is the bedrock of the classification system, right? So
clinicians encounter patients. They see patients who have similar
features and then based on that they start to
describe criteria for You know, patients who present with
similar kinds of complaints or features and You know,
throughout the history of medicine, that kind of approach
has been fairly productive, especially during the 20th century.
Because many of those syndromes were fairly tight in
their organization and had an ideology that was fairly
circumscribed, right? So for example, you can encounter patients
who have similar features. You can use 20th century
style technology to, you know, examine potential correlates, right,
like for instance looking at blood samples under a
microscope and so on and find a key pathogen,
right, or some sort of specific factor that then
leads to this, you know, presentation of symptoms. And
I don't mean to oversimplify, you know. Semantic medicine,
because there are many things in that realm that
are considerably more complicated in terms of their ideology
and pathophysiology. But, you know, to make a long
story short, that that's the paradigm, right, that has
influenced psychiatric classification in a way that's similar to
medicine, in as much as psychiatry is in fact
a branch of medicine. So that has, you know,
that results in the kinds of classification systems that
most people are familiar with that are issued by
authoritative bodies, most notably the American Psychiatric Association's, you
know, diagnostic and Statistical Manual, or PSM and the
very similarly organized um international classification of Disease, which
is published by the World Health Organization. Right, and
so in those systems, diagnoses are arranged into categories,
um, and those categories are delineated by criteria, um.
And the idea basically is that these things exist
in nature as categories and based on the presence
or absence of a fixed number of criteria from
a more extensive set, right, for example, there may
be 9 criteria and the threshold for diagnosis having
5. Using that kind of rubric, right, the clinicians.
Meant to utilize that kind of system to arrive
at an appropriate diagnosis. And then comparing potential diagnostic
labels, the clinician is meant to engage in the
process of differential diagnosis, right? So there may be
similar presentations but subtle differences, right? And the process
of diagnosis is to determine what the most optimal
and, and generally speaking singular, right, um, diagnostic label
would be for any given clinical presentation. So that
that's the system that sort of exists um in
psychiatry, and that system has wide influence over all
mental health disciplines.
So one highly debated question has to do with
what a mental disorder is. Uh, SO, what is
it? I mean, what is your approach to this
question? What are your thoughts about it?
Maybe you could say a little more specifically, my
thoughts about what specifically, maybe.
Uh, I, I mean, the question of what a
mental disorder is, what it means.
That's a very deep question. It's hard to answer
it in a succinct manner because many brilliant people
have written about this issue and tried to come
up with an internally consistent definition, um. Uh, THANKS
to the prompting of my colleague and friend Colin
DeYoung, it is something that I've tried to think
about and write about more recently, and Colin and
I have a perspective on this that we call
the cybernetic perspective, um, and the idea there basically
is that when Uh, an organism that's goal directed
like, like a human being, right, um, encounters circumstances
that Uh, are incompatible with their goals, they often
experience a sense of distress or misalignment, and then,
you know, it's that kind of process of encountering
things that are incompatible with one's goals that leads
to the kind of distress, right? That might be
the essence of You know, um, not feeling well
in a psychological sense, um. And then psychopathology from
that perspective emerges when the uh person, you know,
people as an example here, right? Like when the
person is unable to generate novel strategies or approaches
um to realize a different set of goals or
to realize a different way of approaching their goals.
And so I think that's that's kind of how
we've started to think about it. So similar to
other people's, you know, definitions. There's, you know, the
symptom presentation per se, but that's not, you know,
sufficient to say that psychopathology is present. There also
has to be a thwartedness about it, right? So
I guess that that's been our perspective, but most
perspectives have key similarities, right? So a typical definition
is not just that there are symptoms present, but
also that those symptoms are debilitating, right? So there
has to be, for instance, social and occupational dysfunction.
It goes along with the sense of um. With
the presentation of problematic, you know, psychiatric symptoms.
So, you mentioned, uh, Doctor Colin the Young. I
met him on the show twice and we talked
a lot about personality traits, for example, and their
relationship to psychopathology. So, uh, do individual differences have
any bearing on how we understand and study psychopathology,
and if so, what is the relationship here?
Right, so I guess your question is generally about
the relationship between personality and psychopathology. Again, you picked
a very deep topic on which there's a tremendous
literature. Um, I guess my thinking about it is
that these are very closely related concepts because we
sort of know this um from a number of
different angles, right? So um based on just phenotypic
presentation we could call it, right? So we could
say that's the literature on personality, the literature on
psychopathology. These literatures have evolved somewhat independently, um, and
the assessments that have been developed from both perspectives
are. Uh, PUTTING people into individual difference, you know,
rankings in a way that's very similar, right? So
a personality questionnaire that's meant to get at a
neuroticism trait often has, you know, items on it
that are very similar to the items on something
like a symptom checklist for anxiety and depression. So
it, it may be the case that the, the
sort of de facto distinction has to do with
something like time scale, right? So personality traits are
often thought of as Reasonably consistent and enduring, um.
And psychopathology is often thought of as having more
um time varying features, right, so that it's not
typical for a person to be continually in an
episode of psychopathology, but rather people sort of wax
and wane in their presentation over time based on
what's happening in their lives. So that's probably the
kind of key distinction, something about the time scale,
but You know, speaking, you know, kind of clinically,
uh, it's, it's very difficult for me to think
about a patient, you know, or a client. In
a way that doesn't recognize their dispositional features. Uh,
EVEN if their current functioning is somewhat different from
their typical functioning, right? It, it, their symptom profile,
the way in which they're presenting with things is
embedded in their dispositions. So there's a very intimate
relationship um between personality and psychopathology and the way
I tend to think about it, and this is,
I think, well supported by the evidence is that
personality is kind of the organizing structure. For the
presentation of symptoms, um, but I don't want to
go as far as to say the concepts are
entirely fungible or interchangeable because there are some important
distinctions historically between the concepts. Um, SO hopefully that
kind of addresses your question in a succinct way.
Mhm. So could you tell us about the hierarchical
taxonomy of psychopathology project? I mean, what is it,
what is it about, uh, how did it start
and what are its goals exactly?
Right, so the high top, you know, the hierarchical
taxonomy psychology project started, um. Almost a decade ago
now, um. And the way it got started really
was that, um, my, you know, colleague and and
friend Roman Kotov, right, had this idea that plenty
of people were doing this work on, um, trying
to figure out kind of the structure of psychopathology.
And, and that work kind of had to do
with figuring out if there was consistency to patterns
of comorbidity that were shown among DSM defined entities.
Um, SO going back to our discussion of, you
know, the DSM and categorical classification. In spite of
the sort of basic underlying premise that you can
choose the most optimal, you know, single categorical descriptive
label for any given patient. You know, literature had
emerged showing that that's very difficult to do practically
speaking, um, Particularly in psychiatric epidemiology, where the goal
is to figure out You know, the prevalence of
different kinds of categorical diagnosis in the general population.
So those studies um did away with the attempts
to have very strict hierarchical exclusionary rules among the
categories because it's very hard to apply them in
a way that makes conceptual or clinical sense. Um,
SO instead you kind of assign the diagnostic labels
that seem appropriate for the person's, um, You know,
complaints or presentation or endorsement of, you know, criteria
in an interview. And so you get these patterns
of comorbidity, um, we could talk a little bit
about comorbidity, right? What does that term really mean?
Um. It's a little bit of a misnomer in
my way of thinking about it because comorbidity just,
you know, means that you have to, you know,
diagnoses at the same time. Given whatever time frame
it is you're considering the comorbidity in terms of,
this could happen just because two things have very
high base rates, right? So, um, you know, plenty
of people who meet criteria for depression are also
myopic because these are commonly observed conditions. You can
figure out the prevalence of the joint condition just
from the product of the base rates of the
two conditions, right? So the base rate of A
multiplied by the base rate of B gives you.
The probability that someone's gonna have both things if
they're not correlated with each other. But the phenomenon
right in psychiatric epidemiology that had been observed is
more um that these diagnoses are correlated with each
other. So that means that they're co-occurring at rates
that are greater than would be predicted simply from
the product of the base rates. So what you
see in those kinds of psychiatric epi data is
persons who have um diagnosis, uh well I should
say like, you see that there's um correlations essentially
among diagnoses. So you have many more people with
multiple conditions than you would get if you just
worked out all the base rate products, right? And
it's those patterns of correlation that kind of gave
rise to the um To the structural literature that
was the initial inspiration for the high top consortium
where it, it becomes clear if you start to
study this stuff that there are patterns that are
both um hierarchical in terms of the sort of
organization of individual differences and psychopathological propensities as well
as dimensional, right? So let's, we can work through
those two concepts a little bit here if you
want, right? So, um. The idea of hierarchy is
very familiar to researchers and individual differences in areas
like personality and mental abilities, um, and it's basically
that if you look at patterns of correlations, a
good way to model them is from very fine-grained
individual difference variables. So in in the world of
psychopathology that could be particular symptom cluster is right
like anhedonia, for example, like something that's pretty specific,
but then those things have patterns of correlation that
are pretty psychologically meaningful. And and the psychological meaning
of those correlations is distinctive from the DSM's organizational
structure. That gets really interesting, right back to the
question about personality and psychopathology. So to make a
long story short, if you start to look at
patterns of correlation among psychopathological experiences, you get a
structure that's very similar to the structure of human
personality. Um, MAYBE seen through a darker lens, right,
because you're asking about the maladaptive aspects of personality
expressions. But you kind of see something similar to
the well-known big five, just the maladaptive aspects of
those big five tendencies. So there's pretty good evidence
now that that's the structure of psychopathology, right? It's
not what the DSM imposes, right, or claims, um,
which would be something more like this kind of
linear organization of categories and these computerly separate chapters
that are studied in these distinctive literatures. Rather, the
patterns, right, of correlation among mental disorder diagnoses look
a lot like the patterns of personality that you
see in the general population. So, again, getting back
to high top, the the way that that effort
came about. WAS to say that, OK, like a
bunch of us were doing this work, um, we,
we knew each other and we're publishing productively kind
of independent groups, but it made sense to bring
everybody together in a consortium, particularly to, to, um,
articulate a more comprehensive and empirically based classification system
that wasn't constrained by the traditions of the DSM,
right? So in DSM basically through fiat, right, like
by definition. Just because that's how authorities have put
together the manual, these things are supposed to be
categories. But they might not be. So that's the
hierarchical part, right? These things tend to be organized
from very narrow specific sent clusters all the way
up to broad individual difference variables that you might
think of as a spectrum of interrelated conditions. And
in addition, there's a, there's a related literature that
tries to ask, OK, if we have these patterns
of symptoms. What kind of a model would fit
the patterning we're observing in data? This stuff gets
a little technical, but But basically there's ways to
compare models that um Have the underlying distribution as
more categorical or um discrete would be maybe a
better word for it, right, that there are discrete
groupings of probability masses in the underlying distribution. Versus
that it's more continuous and smooth. So that's another
strong empirical basis for the perspective that is um
sort of underlying the high top effort, right? So,
you know, to make a long story short, you
can formally compare dimensional and categorical models of psychopathological
variation. When you do this formal comparison, there's a
substantial literature showing that things are generally better fit
by dimensional models than they are fit by more
discrete or categorical kinds of models. So those two
robust empirical observations, right, the things tend to be
dimensional in the world of psychopathology, and that they're
pretty well organized into a hierarchy, form the basis
for the high top effort and provide an empirically
based approaches to classification of psychopathology. Um, THAT'S an
alternative to the constraints, right, that exists primarily by
tradition and, you know, psychiatric methodology. Maybe one, go
ahead.
No, no, go ahead, yes, just finish what you're
going to
say. Well, I was just gonna say like how
has evolved? High has evolved into a situation where
there are sort of Well, there are, there are
two related efforts, right? There's the high top um
research consortium, right, which is people working on particular
topics inspired by the high top model. There are
work groups, for instance, on genetics and And neuroscience
and so on and so forth, right, where the
idea is to take those fields and merge them
with the high top perspective on phenotypic organization of
psychopathology. And that's the consortium part, but there's also
a society that's formed now, um, right, so a
scientific society where the idea is that there will
be annual meetings and people pay dues and they,
you know, come to the meetings and present their
research, um, and I would encourage people to go
to the high top web page. Um, I'm sure
we can put the URL into the show notes
or something like this, but if you're interested in
this kind of thing, it's possible to get involved
in. Either or both, the society, right, which is
again like a scientific organization. Um, OR the consortium,
which is, you know, a, a more of a
group focused on the science and scholarship, um. So
the new members are always welcome and I would
encourage people who are interested in what I'm talking
about here to think about joining. That's my point.
So in this taxonomy, what are symptoms and how
do you deal with them and what are the
differences between symptoms and treats?
Yeah, that's an excellent question. I think that's challenging
in the way that we were discussing earlier in
this conversation, but in, in short, um, that distinction
is pretty fuzzy. It probably has something to do
with the time scale on which these things are
presented. But both kinds of constructs are sitting within
the high top hierarchy, right? So traits again are
more like a disposition to engage in a behavior
over time, right, kind of a, a probability, right,
that a person's gonna be in a given state
at any given point in time over some aggregate
amount of time, um, whereas symptoms might be thought
of as more like things that change more from
time to time. So classic examples, right, are things
like um self-harm, right? So. Self-harm tends not to
be um entirely trait-like, although some people can be
very persistent in their self-harming tendencies. There's more variation
over time and how intensely people are engaging in
that specific and circumscribed set of, you know, very
troubling behaviors. Whereas the disposition, right, to want to
harm oneself, um, is coming from, you know, neuroticism
and distress and, you know, qualities like that that
the person might have as a disposition over longer
chunks of time. Um, SO that I think is
kind of the distinction within high top, right? Symptoms
are more like things that come and go and
traits are more like things that are more consistent
over time, but they're meaningfully related to each other,
because the probability of having a symptom emerges from
the position that one has on a, you know,
trait like construct. And the key to moving this
discussion forward is um fine-grained longitudinal data, um, which
many people involved in Hightop are very interested in,
challenging data to collect, but kind of the key
to unraveling these time scales. That makes sense? So
like if you really want to understand in in
an empirically based way the different time scales of
different human propensities to different behaviors, you got to
study people in an intensive longitudinal fashion. And you
got to study them closely over long over, you
know, both shorter time frames and longer time frames
to figure out what things are, what kind of
behaviors tend to be like this, right? Like they
come and go, and what kind of behaviors are
more consistent. And that gets um. It's very important,
but it's very challenging because you can imagine that
different people, right, are gonna have different patterns and
so there's just a lot of different possibilities within
that space, and it's an active area of research
at this time.
Mhm. And how do you approach etiology and um
causal influences including genetic and environmental influences in this
model of psychopathology?
So ideology specifically, is that what you're thinking about
here? Like, yeah, so that, that's um. You you
really hit on kind of the key topics and
the most challenging areas, but sure, like we can
try to get some um purchase here on the
concept of etiology, right? So when I think about,
you know, ideology, I'm thinking about it in terms
of more distal causes and also more proximal causes.
Um, AND I think that that distinction between things
that are further in the past and things that
are more, you know, close by in the person's,
you know, history. Um, IT'S pretty important. So when
I think about the distal etiology, um, I'm often
thinking about, well, genomics, right? Um, I think there's,
you know, plenty of evidence that, um, A key
part of the distal etiology of psychopathology is sitting
in the human genome, um, which absent something terrible
happening to people like a radiation, right, is gonna
be consistent through your life, um. And those um
You know, causal factors can be studied now given
modern molecular genetic technologies, um. And so that's a
key part of the distal ideology of psychopathology, right,
is the complement that a person has of um
genomic variants that In a very complex and multifaceted
way, right? So we know that from genomics too,
right, that none of these causes are very discrete
and specific. Rather, there's a bunch of different segments
of DNA, oftentimes at the level of even single
nucleotide polymorphisms, they kind of add up to give
a person a position on a trait like, you
know, kind of dimension. Um, THAT is probably a
key part of the distal ideology, but that's of
course, only part of the equation because it's not
just DNA as, you know, the only driving force
behind a person's propensities to experience psychopathology. It also,
um, Obviously has a lot to do with environmental
experiences that are often correlated with, right, so this
gets tricky too, right? BECAUSE the environment is not
necessarily completely independent of the genome. People are exposed
to environments that are correlated with their genomes. Um,
SO the gene environment correlation active also, as well
as the potential for gene environment interactions, right? So
the exposures might be, um, such that the person's
genetic propensity is enhanced or um kind of suppressed
by environmental exposures like stress experiences and so on
and so forth, right? Um, SO that all gets
kind of carrying complicated, but that's unfortunately the nature
of the material we're dealing with, right? Psychopathology is
not simple to study. It's multifaceted in its ideology.
It has both distal and proximal components. Right, so
things that are further in the past and things
that are more proximal and to develop a realistic
empirically based model of how genes and environments come
together to influence psychopathological propensities. IS obviously the holy
grail, right, in terms of understanding the ideology of
psychopathology, but pretty difficult to accomplish in a kind
of Um, tractable, manageable, replicable, scientific way. Um, NEVERTHELESS,
I think that's the task in front of us.
IS to combine technologies that are coming from genomics
with an intensive understanding of exposures, right, as an
epidemiologist might call them, right? So environmental experiences to
articulate more um evidence-based models of how genes and
environments come together to influence what a person's. Particular
symptom profile might be like at any given point
in time.
So, uh, let me ask you a different kind
of question now. How would the classification of mental
disorders look like within the framework of a hierarchical
taxonomy?
Right, so kind of what's the diagnostic process given
a high top type of model, is that kind
of what you're asking? Yes. Yeah, so I think
that the key distinction to appreciate between um classical.
DSM style differential diagnosis as the clinical task and
the sort of high top classification scheme as the
clinical task. Is that in the high top scheme
things are both dimensional and multi-dimensional, right? So we
could start with the classic paradigm in the way
that you're sort of taught to do this, um,
when you're being trained clinically, right, is You know,
interview the patients, take a good history, and try
to figure out based on the clinical data available
to you, the best diagnostic label. Right, best being
defined as, OK, consider the hundreds and hundreds of
categories that are sitting in something like the DSM.
Consider a careful differential diagnosis kind of um approach,
right? Like, so is this closer to You know,
something like major depression with recurrent episodes, there's a
closer to something like generalized anxiety disorder, even though
those, you know, syndromes have overlapping features. Which they
clearly do in terms of the, you know, criteria
for the disorders, but you're supposed to consider things
like, well, how, what's the balance between, you know,
sort of low mood experiences and more activated, you
know, kind of anxiety experiences and, and you can
try to do this, but with real people, it
doesn't work well. It's something I've often, I've been
very interested in as a clinician, right? So the
way I got to a lot of what I'm
interested in is trying to do this, right? Working
with patients. Trying to be, um, you know, A
good student of the of the psychiatric classification type
system, right? Trying to use it effectively to find
the right diagnosis and finding that it's very difficult
to pick the one right optimal diagnostic label. So
then turning to the more hierarchical, you know, high
top kind of approach, it's more like a profile.
Um, SO instead of saying that you belong in
this category and not these nearby ones, it's more
like, all right, let's look at the key dimensions
that um have been identified in people and position
the person based on the assessment data within those
dimensions. So you end up more with like a
profile, uh, and that that handles problems of comorbidity
and differential diagnosis much more deftly in my view
than the differential diagnosis paradigm. So you would have
a, a pattern right across the major, you know,
spectra, right, that have been developed in high top.
You could think about the presentation of different levels
of resolution, right? That's the hierarchical part, right? Where's
the person on these big broad spectrums. And clinically
often you want to know more like the fine-grained
elements cause that's more clinically useful, right, to have
some fine grain information and you don't have to.
Deal with the differential diagnosis problem, which is often
frustrating and has been a, a thorn in the
side of psychiatric classification for as long as people
have tried to do it. Right, so there are
these interstitial right in between psychiatric categories that have
a checkered history and anybody trying to make sense
of them. Um SCHIZOAFFECTIVE disorder is a classic example
of this, right? When What do you do when
a person is not very clearly mood disordered versus
very clearly having a psychotic type of, you know,
episode. And DSM handles this by having lots of
different categories having to do with the time course
and relative balance of those experiences. That is hard,
right, because people don't fit neatly into those categories.
You still end up with people who have prominent
mood disorder symptoms and prominent um reality testing type
symptoms. And then what we can see you're not
really supposed to use schizoaffective very often cause it's
an uncomfortable thing where you're not really making a
clear decision. In something like high top, there's no
need for such, you know, hand wringing about the
right diagnostic category. Rather, you have people with different
balances of mood problems and psychotic problems, and it
just falls naturally into the possibility that people may
be elevated in two different spectrums simultaneously. And and
that's much closer to what the phenotypes, right, the
clinical presentations look like in data, right? That's the
empirical basis for the high top approach. And I
could go further and say, you know, the evidence
from genetic research, certainly from the twin studies, right?
And now emerging also from the molecular studies, is
that these things aren't highly discreet and and separable
in the way that's implied by the classical, you
know, categorical classification system. Um, So, but it requires
a change of focus, right? It requires the clinician
to be thinking more about dimensional profiles and less
about optimal, you know, categories. If that makes sense.
Mhm.
So in your work, I also read about the
general factor of psychopathology or how to go from
individual symptoms up to a general factor of psychopathology.
So, what is it? What what is a general
factor of psychopathology?
This is a concept, um. That emerges from the
evidence that everything that has historically been called psychopathology
is positively correlated with everything else. Different degrees, right?
So the degrees of correlation is what gives you
evidence for the hierarchy, right? Not everything is correlated
with the same degree. So this gets again sort
of technical and statistical, but maybe I can describe
it verbally, you know, a little bit. If it
were the case that all the psychopathology symptoms. Right,
like everything that's in the criteria of the DSM
we're all correlated with each other to the same
degree. Then you would say, well, OK, it it's
a parsimonious way to describe that data matrix by
saying there's one thing. And it manifests in lots
of different ways, but there's really kind of like
one thing that's driving all of this. Whereas, um,
what you really see in data are that they're
correlated all positively, right? They, they're not, they're rarely
negatively correlated or zero correlated because everything is correlated
at least a little bit with everything else in
psychopathology. But there are denser groups of correlations, and
it's that patterning of the density versus sparsity if
you will, right of, of different patternings that gives
rise to the hierarchy. But nevertheless, at the highest
level of the hierarchy, right, you can posit the
existence of a general propensity to experience all of
psychopathology because there is evidence that everything is positively
correlated with everything else. So this is a long
way of saying that what it's not nonsensical to
think about a general propensity given that kind of
data structure. But it's very abstract, right? Because you're
talking about everything being correlated with everything else. I
think the key to getting your head around this,
right, is that there's a hierarchy. It doesn't consist
of just one general factor. It consists of factors
arranged in this hierarchical kind of arrangement. And why
that's important is because, well, it's important for every
possible reason, right? Like if you want to understand
the etiology of these things or their pathophysiology or
how to describe a patient who presents clinically, you're
gonna have to think about the whole hierarchy. It's
not super clinically useful to say a person has
a lot of psychopathology. Like what are you gonna
do with that practically speaking, but nevertheless, there is
some evidence that you can think about a general
factor because everything's correlated with everything. So, again, to
make a long story short, potential ideologic factors, right,
like underlying genomic factors or whatever. ARE going to
be located in different parts of that hierarchy, um,
and there's, you know, evidence for that. And not
a difficult thing is like I can give you
an example of how this would work, right? Like
there's propensity to experience externalizing kinds of problems, right?
So acting out, doing things that would be grounds
for arrest, acting impulsively, um, acting in a way
that's um antagonistic to other people, right? Those things
tend to coalesce into this broad externalizing spectrum. But,
you know, people with an externalizing propensity are at
a higher risk of developing substance use problems than
people at a lower externalizing propensity. But the specific
substance is gonna have a lot to do with
the ability to metabolize specific substances. Um, SO, right,
there are ideologic factors at different levels, like a
person with a high externalizing propensity who's attracted to
substances because of that propensity, presumably, right? Might not
be able to develop alcohol dependence, right, as opposed
to dependence on some other substance because they can't
metabolize alcohol like another person who is able to
metabolize large amounts of alcohol, you know. Uh, BECAUSE
of metabolic factors that have nothing to do with
the externalizing propensity but are sort of separate and
at a lower level of the hierarchy. So that
that's the key to understanding this, right, that there
are ideologic factors at different levels of, of, you
know, breath or extraction. And so you can't really
think about alcoholism relevant genes. As separate from externalizing
relevant genes, although there are going to be things
within there, right, that have different positions within the
hierarchy. Um, SO I don't know, that's a, that's
a pretty complicated set of things to try to
describe briefly and, you know, verbally, but hopefully I've
done an OK job with it because Again, there's
a, there's a literature, right, a scientific literature that
supports what I'm saying here that, you know, the
interested listener might want to get into, um, but
that, that's basically how that seems to work, right?
I think there's fairly good evidence for what I've
tried to articulate. Mhm.
So let me ask you now a question specifically
about personality disorders. So, what do you make of
the way they are currently understood and classified?
Well, right, so this, this question is a very,
um, it's sort of like a specific subfield of
the general stuff we've been talking about, right? So,
historically. Personality disorders, um, and their classification have emerged
from clinical observation. And so there's a, you know,
historical psychiatric literature based on observing certain kinds of
patients, finding that some have very significant interpersonal challenges,
right, that go beyond just Mood symptoms or psychotic
symptoms or whatever, um. And it's kind of that
observation that some people's psychopathology manifests itself in very
interpersonal ways that gives rise to this putatively separate
group of conditions called the personality disorders. Um, AND
you know, the DSMs, um, at least up through
DSM-4, talk about this in terms of categories, right?
So DSM-4 posits 10 discrete categories, personality disorder as
well as personality disorder not otherwise specified. And says,
you know, based on this basic paradigm like find
the right one, right? So is this person more
like schizoty personality disorder, right? So having odd or
eccentric beliefs and being sort of socially withdrawn versus
more like borderline personality disorder which is emotional dysregulation,
um, interpersonal dysregulation, um. Transient stress-related association, like a
whole host of different things that are supposed to
be relevant to borderline, and you gotta pick the
right label basically, as the clinician. So that doesn't
work, right? Um, IN the same way that generally
speaking, classical categorical approaches don't work cause you see
persons who you might think of as having significant
personality pathology, you try to put them in these
boxes and it doesn't really work because they have
presentations that intermingle all the different features of the
different 10 disorders. Um, AND that's what led to
these alternatives, um, that are now, you know, kind
of the main focus of the personality disorders literature,
the DSM-5's alternative model of personality disorders and the
ICD 11 personality disorder system, which is very similar.
And those, you know, look like what we were
talking about before, right? They say there are these
broad dimensions, right, that are very similar to a
darker version of the of the big five. Um,
AND, and when you think about a person, you
want to think about kind of their position within
those dimensions. Um, THEY have the added element of
the overall, uh, kind of constructive personality disorder, you
know this criteria A in the alternative model, um,
which has to do with self and other, um.
You know, functioning, right, like you have a clear
and consistent conception of who you are from time
to time and place to place, and do you
relate to other people in a way that might
be considered adaptive, um. And it's the combination of
those things that kind of defines personality disorder in
these modern classification systems. And so the approach is
very similar to what we've been discussing overall, right?
How much interpersonal and self dysfunction is there, right?
That's criterion A. And then what's the patterning across
major dimensions of personality, that's criterion B again in
the AMPD approach. And that's, you know, a prominent
approach now cause it works better, right? Like that's
a much more, I I would say clinically useful
way to describe real patients, um, versus trying to
put them into these um categories that just don't
capture actual clinical presentations.
So, let me ask you now about one last
topic that is very different from what we've been
talking about. What is subjective well-being?
Well, again, like a substantial literature exists, right, talking
about what subjective well-being is. Um, I mean, I,
I have been influenced by Carol Griff's conceptualization of,
of what she has called psychological well-being, um, because
Carol is a close colleague and she and I
worked together on the midlife in the United States
study, right, the big MA study. I've worked with
a lot of those measures and data, um, and
there's many elements to it, but if you had
to succinctly describe the essence of well-being, it's a
sense that things are going well for you and
your place in the world is secure, right? I
guess if I had to put it in one
quick phrase, um. And of course that's something that
all human beings strive toward, right? Everybody would like
to have a sense of psychological well-being. Um, AND
there's just different ways that it can be manifest,
um, so I think that's another one of these
higher and multi-dimensional kinds of situations similar to psychopathology.
Um, RIGHT, it's, it's a sense that you're Doing
well. I mean we could talk about it in
terms of varieties of happiness too, right, to bring
that construct into play, right? So there's um Eudaimonic,
um, and hedonic versions of well-being, right? Hedonic being
I feel good, right? I have pleasant emotional experiences,
um, and eudaimonic, my, my life has a sense
of meaning and purpose. Um, I think that it's
the combination of those two things that, that, you
know, sort of epitomize human flourishing, right? That's the,
that's the stuff that you'd like to achieve as
a human being, right, that you're generally in a
positive mood idonically and also. That you have a
sense that life is is meaningful, right? That you
have pursuits and goals and things that you're trying
to do that bring you um joy and engagement
with life in spite of all of its multifaceted
challenges.
Uh, SO you mentioned eymonic and hedonic well-being. What
about social well-being? Yeah,
that's a good point, right? Um, CONNECTIONS with important
others is, is certainly. A key element of well-being
also, um. And one could think about sort of
a three dimensional kind of structure that or that
recognizes the social aspects as potentially separate or separable,
but these things tend to be pretty correlated with
each other, right? And they tend to be reciprocal
in their relationship with each other. So for example,
people who have a disposition toward positive moods. Right,
it, it could be argued that that disposition, that
tendency to be in a good mood, regardless of
what's going on, right, promotes extroverted behavior. So right,
you can think about extroversion, the personality trait like
being outgoing and friendly and engaged with other people
and enjoying social interactions as having a positive emotional
core. Um, AND that's how, you know, many, many
theorists at the intersection of personality and mood, like,
you know, David Watson and Leanna Clark and people
like that have talked about it based on evidence,
right? That, you know, extroverted behaviors have a positive
emotional core. People who are in a good mood
like to engage with other people because that's a
normal human thing to do when you're in a
good mood. Well, you could go on a podcast
and have, you know, conversations about interesting topics, right?
Like it requires a certain amount of Positive mood,
right, being in a good frame of mind to
want to engage socially. So I guess what I'm
trying to say is like, yeah, you can think
about different manifestations in the social world, in the,
in the subjective, you know, sort of world too,
right? Like there's a difference between like how am
I perceiving myself subjectively and what am I doing
interpersonally. But they tend to be reciprocal, right, correlated
with each other because they have this, you know,
sickly kind of aspect to them where they kind
of bounce off each other and mutually reinforce a
kind of sense of well-being in the world.
So, one last question then, is there any relationship
between subjective well-being and personality traits?
Oh, absolutely, yeah. And when I think about that,
they, they tend to want to be located in
that extroversion kind of space. OK, so I think
there's there's, you know, a literature on this, right,
but. That the mood space and the personality space
are closely related to each other, um, right, so
the different, different mood dispositions, um, can be thought
of as having something to do with the extroversion
neuroticism space, right, and are closely related to each
other. Um, So I guess that's how I would
think about that, um. You know, right, that that
that there's a um an effective basis for a
lot of what is considered personality because what those
personality dispositions are driven by is affective dispositions. Um,
SO just the tendency to be in certain kinds
of mood states, if you think about them over
time, right, can be thought of as personality dispositions,
um, and they have You know, intrapersonal and interpersonal
manifestations, um. And that's kind of the essence of
what's going on with, you know, extroversion and neuroticism,
right, that those big trait domains have a lot
to do with a person's um mood dispositions.
Right. So, so I, I mean, does that mean
then that if someone scores high on extroversion, then
they tend to also have higher subjective well-being and
if someone scores high on neuroticism, uh, it's the
opposite then.
Uh, THE way you said it makes it sound
like there's sort of one dimension, but they're kind
of, um, orthogonal dimensions, right? So, OK, so the
key thing to sort of recognize there is that
a person can have simultaneous propensities toward. This regulated
mood and positive mood. It, it's a little, it's
maybe sounds a little hard to put together psychologically,
but if you think about it a little bit,
it kind of maybe makes more sense. So, and
it makes sense, uh I wanna say like phylogenetically,
like when you think about, you know, systems in
the brain and their origins, right, in evolutionary history
and things like this, right? There are systems for
dealing with the potential for threat. And there are
systems for dealing with the potential for reward, and
there are separable systems. So you can imagine a
human organism that has high levels of both, right?
And that would be a person who is outgoing,
friendly, um, engaged, and also anxious and worried. Um,
THAT'S not too difficult of a person to imagine.
I can imagine people like this and I've known
people like this, right? They want to engage with
people. They're very excited. They're extroverted and outgoing, but
they're also very worried and concerned and a lot
of anxiety and like those things can happen simultaneously
in a person's personality, I guess it's the point
I'm trying to make. And that's consistent with the
structure of personality and mood, right, that those are
separable dimensions.
Mhm. Right. So, just before we go, where can
people find you and your work on the internet?
In the usual scholarly resources, I guess, right? So
you could have a Google Scholar page, right? I'm
not, I'm not particularly engaged with social media because
I find that to be kind of um. Difficult
and distracting, right, when I'm trying to sort of
concentrate on. Academic work, one could spend a lot
of time, and many people do, on academic um
social media, right, arguing about things or engaging with
colleagues, and I've never loved that just in terms
of how I want to spend my time, although
I understand that there are potential implications for me
interacting with the world by not being super active
on social media. But I like to think about
these things in a more um Maybe old fashioned
way, right? Like that that my scientific publications are
more thought through. Um, THEN, you know, me firing
off some social media posts, um, in response to
some provocation, right? So I don't think I would
do well with the dynamic aspects of social media.
So I don't really have a presence there. Um,
BUT yeah, you can find my web page at
the University of Minnesota, you can find my Google
Scholar profile. I don't mind emails, right? Like I,
I don't, I have an easier time responding one
on one to people when I know the context
of the conversation, right, than broadcasting something to the
whole world. The social media often feels to me
like yelling into a void, and maybe some people
are listening, but everybody's yelling, right? And it just,
I, it's hard for me to conceptualize it as
bringing together communities based on well thought out, you
know, kinds of ideas. Because everything's so spontaneous and
sudden, but maybe I'm just old fashioned that way,
and I should get with the times and be
more engaged with it, but currently I don't really
do much of that kind of activity.
Yeah, no, that's fair enough and interesting insights on
social media. So, but I will be leaving then
links to your university page and your Google Scholar
page in the description of the interview. And thank
you so much for taking the time to come
on the show. It's been really nice to talk
with you.
No, I really appreciate your very thoughtful questions. You
certainly hit on things that are very deep. Right,
not easy to deal with succinctly, so hopefully I
did OK. It felt, it felt a bit like
a final examination, not for decades. But that's OK.
I think those are really kind of the key
questions that you were asking. So hopefully, um, your
listeners know a little bit more about it and
know where to find me if they want to
converse further.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Matri Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnsergoro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Jonathan Labrant Ju Jasent and the
Samuel Corriere, Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus
Fran David Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego
Londono Correa. Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn
Pavlostaevskynaleb medicine, Gary Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza,
Julian Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca
Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteus Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani
Smith John Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau,
Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David
Williams, the Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior, Old Heringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert
Gray, Zigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark
Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller,
Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular
John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean
Nelson, Mike Levine, and Jos Net. A special thanks
to my producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas
Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni
Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers
Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.